--- Page 1 ---
A

B

C

D

E

F

G

H

333

DAV PUBLIC SCHOOL

v.

THE SENIOR MANAGER, INDIAN BANK,

MIDNAPUR BRANCH & ORS.

(Civil Appeal No. 9352 of 2019)

DECEMBER 18, 2019

[DR. DHANANJAYA Y CHANDRACHUD

AND HRISHIKESH ROY, JJ.]

Consumer Protection – Deficiency of service – The complaint

of the principal of the school alleged deficiency of service against

the respondent-bank inasmuch as the school’s bank accounts

without net banking facility was linked with personal Customer

Information File (CIF) of the principal of the school, facilitating

online transaction which led to siphoning of Rs.30,00,000/- from

school’s account – Siphoning of Rs.25,00,000/- was detected on

09.09.2014 and then Rs.5,00,000/- was unauthorizedly transferred

from the school’s account the very next day before it was blocked

– The State Commission concluded that there was gross error on

the part of the bank as admittedly the complainant-school did not

opt for net banking facility in respect of school’s accounts – The

State Commission suspected involvement of the then principal of

the school in the said fraudulent transactions and also observed

that the complainant school cannot avoid their vicarious liability

for acts and deeds of their employee – Accordingly, the respondentbank was directed to pay Rs.1,00,000/- as compensation – The

Banking Ombudsman too declared that the Bank was at fault –

NCDRC concurred with the relief granted by the State Commission

– On appeal, held: It was not possible to siphon out any money

from the school’s accounts without accounts being linked with net

banking facility – As concurrently found by the State Commission,

the Banking Ombudsman and also by the NCDRC, the bank has

rendered themselves liable by enabling net banking facility by

linking the individual account of the school’s Principal, to the

school’s account – The only reason why the State Commission as

well as the NCDRC had limited the compensation sum to

Rs. 1,00,000/- was because of the perceived complicity of the

Principal – But the charge sheet filed by the police reveals how

 [2019] 15 S.C.R. 333

333
--- Page 2 ---
A

B

C

D

E

F

G

H

334 SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2019] 15 S.C.R.

the fraudulent transaction was made by the two charge sheeted

accused and more importantly the police did not find complicity

of the Principal of the school, with those fraudulent transactions

– Insofar as the loss of Rs. 25,00,000/- is concerned, the

complainant cannot be held responsible directly or even vicariously,

either as an institution or the Principal, as an individual – The

respondent Bank directed to compensate the School to the tune of

Rs. 25,00,000/- transferred until 9.9.2014, when the

misappropriation was first detected but not for the additional sum

siphoned on the next date from the School’s account.

Allowing the appeal, the Court

HELD: 1. The key question to be considered here is

whether, without the school’s account being linked with net

banking facility, any money from the bank account could have

been siphoned out by the miscreants. The obvious answer to

this question has to be in the negative. As concurrently found

by the State Commission, the Banking Ombudsman and also by

the NCDRC, the bank has rendered themselves liable by enabling

net banking facility by linking the individual account of the

school’s Principal, to the school’s account. The only reason why

the State Commission as well as the NCDRC had limited the

compensation sum to Rs. 1,00,000/- was because of the

perceived complicity of the Principal. But the charge sheet filed

by the police reveals how the fraudulent transaction was made

by the two charge sheeted accused and more importantly the

police did not find complicity of the Principal of the school, with

those fraudulent transactions. The Banking Ombudsman too

declared that the Bank was at fault which facilitated the loss to

the School but declined to order refund as the demanded sum

(Rs 30,00,000/-) was beyond the pecuniary jurisdiction of the

Banking Ombudsman. [Para 11] [340-F-H; 341-A]

2.Considering the above, the denial of the compensation

corresponding to the extent of the School’s loss, by the State

Commission as well as by the NCDRC would not be justified. The

question then is whether the Bank should be asked to

compensate the school for the entire loss through such

fraudulent transaction. In this context, it may be noticed that

when the siphoning of a large sum of Rs. 25,00,000/- was first
--- Page 3 ---
A

B

C

D

E

F

G

H

335

detected by the school staff, the official complaint was not lodged

immediately and only on the next date, the complaint was filed

with the Bank authorities. Whether the Bank Manager was

verbally informed on the very date of detection or on the next

day is an aspect which is difficult to conclude conclusively and

therefore the subsequent siphoning of Rs. 5,00,000/- by the next

day, may have been occasioned by the contributory negligence

of the school authorities. But, insofar as the loss of Rs.

25,00,000/- is concerned, the complainant cannot be held

responsible directly or even vicariously, either as an institution

or the Principal, as an individual. This Court is therefore of the

view that the respondent Bank should be directed to compensate

the School to the tune of Rs. 25,00,000/- transferred until

9.9.2014, when the misappropriation was first detected but not

for the additional sum siphoned on the next date from the

School’s account. [Para 12] [341-B-E]

CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION : Civil Appeal No. 9352

of 2019.

From the Judgment and Order dated 24.04.2018 of the National

Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission, New Delhi in First Appeal

No. 386 of 2018.

Surendra Nath, Sr. Adv., Subhasish Bhowmick, Ms. Manisha

Pandey, Kunal Mallick, Aditya Rajeshwar, Advs. for the Appellants.

Dhruv Mehta, Sr. Adv., Himanshu Munshi, Avinash Kumar

Bharti, Manish Garani, Amit Kumar Chourasia, Anmol Mehta, Advs.

the Respondents.

The Judgment of the Court was delivered by

HRISHIKESH ROY, J.

1.The challenge in this appeal is to the final judgment and order

dated 24.4.2018 in the First Appeal1 whereunder the National Consumer

Disputes Redressal Commission2 dismissed the appeal of the appellant

and upheld the order passed by the State Consumer Disputes Redressal

Commission, West Bengal3.. Under the impugned judgment, the liability

1

 First Appeal No. 386 of 2018

2

 “NCDRC”

3

 The State Commission

DAV PUBLIC SCHOOL v. THE SENIOR MANAGER, INDIAN

BANK, MIDNAPUR BRANCH & ORS.
--- Page 4 ---
A

B

C

D

E

F

G

H

336 SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2019] 15 S.C.R.

of the respondent Indian Bank was limited to Rs 1,00,000/- although

the complainant suffered total loss of Rs 30,00,000/-, from their Bank

Accounts and sought return of the lost sum.

2.1 The complaint of the Principal of the DAV Public School4

alleged deficiency of service against the respondent Bank inasmuch

as the School’s bank accounts without net banking facility, was linked

with the personal Customer Information File (CIF) of the Principal of

the School, facilitating online transaction which led to siphoning of Rs

30,00,000/- (Rupees Thirty Lakhs), from the school’s account.

2.2 The complaint mentioned that the DAV Public School,

Paschim Medinipur maintained three accounts with the Indian Bank,

Midnapur Branch in District Paschim Medinipur, West Bengal namely,

i) the School General Fund Account – A/c No. 553624984; ii) School

Pupils Fund Account – A/c No. 553625423 and iii) School Interest

Account – A/c No. 933045930. While the Withdrawal from the first

two accounts could be made through cheques under joint signature of

the Principal, DAV Public School, Midnapore and Managers/Principal,

DAV Model School, IIT Kharagpur, the third referred account was

authorised to be operated by the Principal of the DAV Public School,

under his own signature. It was the specific case of the complainant

that the school never approached the Bank for net banking facility for

any of their three accounts, but on 2.9.2014 when the Principal opened

his personal savings account (distinct from the school accounts) for the

purpose of transferring money through net banking, he learnt that the

three accounts of the school got tagged with his personal savings

account. As the school Principal was required to go on an urgent official

tour, he decided to report the matter to the Bank after his return from

the official tour.

2.3 On 7.9.2014, one of the school employees was sent to the

Bank for updating the passbook but the passbook couldn’t be updated

for technical reason as informed by the bank’s staff. Again on 9.9.2014

the School employee went to the bank for updating the passbook and

it was then detected that Rs. 25,00,000/- (Rupees Twenty Five Lakhs)

was unauthorizedly transferred from the school’s account. This was

brought to the notice of the Bank’s manager on 9.9.2014, but the Bank

Manager advised the concerned school staff to visit the Bank on the

next day morning. But by the time the account could be blocked, another

4

 The School
--- Page 5 ---
A

B

C

D

E

F

G

H

337

sum of Rs. 5,00,000/- (Rupees Five Lakhs) got transferred from the

school’s account.

2.4 It was also mentioned by the complainant that the mobile

phone sim of the complainant was blocked on 5.9.2014 and subsequently

the complainant learnt that a duplicate sim card was issued against his

mobile number and his phone bill was paid by somebody even before

the normal bill could be generated on 8.9.2014. With this information,

the complainant demanded return of the siphoned sum with interest in

the school’s bank account.

3. The Bank contested the case before the State Commission.

They acknowledged that the school did not apply for net banking facility

but inadvertently the personal CIF of the then Principal of the School

got tagged with the school’s accounts which facilitated the online transfer

of school’s money.

4. The BSNL Authorities who were arrayed as respondent Nos.

4 and 5 in the Complaint before the State Commission pleaded that

the then Principal on his way back from Howrah to Kharagpur lost his

mobile phone with the BSNL post paid sim No. 9434340725 for which,

diary was lodged on 4.9.2014 at the Kharagpur GRP as GRPs No.

1091. Thereafter, the Principal applied for duplicate sim which was

issued after completion of necessary formalities. Subsequently, request

was made to the BSNL to port out the said phone number and

accordingly, the sim card was ported out from BSNL to another service

provider i.e. Bharti Airtel. But most curiously, the transfer was made

not in the name of the registered phone subscriber Sanjiva Kumar Sinha,

but in the name of one Sanjay Kumar Sinha who purportedly resided

in the same address.

5.1 The State Commission after noting the rival contentions

recorded that admittedly the complainant school did not opt for net

banking facility in respect of any of their three accounts. Thus, gross

error on the part of the Bank was found in the siphoning of the money

from the school’s account and accordingly, it was concluded that “it

was a clear case of gross deficiency on the part of the OP Bank”.

The Commission then considered whether the OP Bank should be made

liable to make good the loss suffered by the Complainant. It was then

observed that mere tagging of bank accounts with online banking facility

is not enough to transfer fund through RTGS/NEFT, since access to

the concerned bank accounts is through User ID, Login, Password, One

DAV PUBLIC SCHOOL v. THE SENIOR MANAGER, INDIAN

BANK, MIDNAPUR BRANCH & ORS. [HRISHIKESH ROY, J.]
--- Page 6 ---
A

B

C

D

E

F

G

H

338 SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2019] 15 S.C.R.

Time Password etc. Thus, complicity of the then Principal of the School

in those internet transactions was suspected. The Commission also

noted that the school Principal failed to inform the BSNL authorities

and the Bank in due time and thus despite detecting the illegal transfer

of the large sum i.e. Rs 25,00,000/-, the official complaint was not

lodged on 9.9.2014 itself and this facilitated the transfer of another Rs.

5,00,000/-, from the school’s account.

5.2 Thus, inference was drawn by the State Commission that

either the then Principal of the complainant school was the mastermind

behind all the fraudulent withdrawals or he compromised the user ID

and login Password with others but, in either case, the School Principal

cannot escape his personal liability and as a corollary thereof, the

complainant cannot avoid their vicarious liability for acts and deeds of

their employee. With these observations, while gross deficiency in

service on the part of the OP Bank in safeguarding the money of the

complainant school was noticed and they were held liable to pay

compensation to the complainant, only partial relief was allowed by

declaring that the Bank authorities (OP Nos. 1,2,3 and 6) shall be jointly

and/or severally be responsible for payment of Rs 1,00,000/- as

compensation together with cost of Rs. 10,000/-, to the complainant.

Aggrieved by the limited relief granted by the State Commission by

its order dated 4.1.2018, the complainant approached the NCDRC

through First Appeal No. 386 of 2018.

6. The Appellate forum referred to the facts noted by the State

Commission and observed that it is not in dispute that the complainant

school had not applied to the Bank for providing internet banking facility

for their accounts and therefore, it was a mistake on the part of the

Bank to tag the school’s account with the personal account of Sanjiva

Kumar Sinha the Principal of the School. The NCDRC also adverted

as to whether the transactions could have taken place either with

connivance or gross negligence on the part of Sanjiva Kumar Sinha.

It refused to accept the contention that some unscrupulous person

obtained the duplicate sim of the mobile phone of Sanjiva Kumar Sinha

and then obtained user ID, login and the transaction password, using

the duplicate sim. The appellate forum also found it hard to accept

that when the mobile phone of Sanjiva Kumar Sinha remained inactive

for six days between 5.9.2014 to 10.9.2014, the subscriber assumed it

was a network issue without suspicion of any wrong doing and did not

inform the matter to the service provider. The fact that duplicate sim
--- Page 7 ---
A

B

C

D

E

F

G

H

339

was issued by the BSNL authorities on compliance of necessary

formalities and eventually mobile connection was transferred in the name

of one Sanjay (Kumar Sinha) was treated to be another circumstance

which allegedly indicated the involvement of Sanjiva Kumar Sinha in

the fraudulent transaction. With these observations, the NCDRC

concurred with the partial relief granted by the State Commission

determining Rs. 1,00,000/-, as the compensation payable by the Bank.

The appeal accordingly came to be dismissed on 24.4.2018 by NCDRC.

7. Assailing the above decision of the NCDRC, Mr. Surendra

Nath, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant would

submit that when deficiency in service by the Bank was found by both

the State Commission as also by the NCDRC, there is little justification

for limiting the compensation to Rs. 1,00,000/- when the School

suffered total loss of Rs. 30,00,000/-.

8. On the other hand, Mr. Dhruv Mehta, learned senior counsel

appearing on behalf of the Bank submits that a formal complaint with

the Bank was lodged only on the next day even after learning of the

siphoning of Rs. 25,00,000/- from the school’s account and this should

be considered to be a contributory factor in the loss occasioned to the

complainant. The learned senior counsel accordingly tries to justify the

limiting of compensation to Rs. 1,00,000/-, by the forum.

9. Before proceeding any further with the matter, it is necessary

for us to refer to the proceeding before the Banking Ombudsman on

the complaint No. 201415005002580 lodged by S.K. Sinha, Principal,

on behalf of DAV Public School against the respondent Bank. The

Banking Ombudsman in their decision on 4.2.2015 (Annexure P-11) also

noted that the Bank was at fault in linking the School’s account with

internet banking facility without request from the account holder and

recorded as follows:-

“From the contentions of both the parties, I observe that there is

fault of the bank as they have linked the school’s account with

internet banking facility without any request from the school

authorities which caused the fraud. The case is under

investigation by police whoso outcome is not known. But as there

is a limit of Rs.10 lakh for giving an award under the Banking

Ombudsman Scheme (BOS), 2006. I am not in a position to

instruct the bank to pay the amount of Rs. 30 lakh. Hence, the

DAV PUBLIC SCHOOL v. THE SENIOR MANAGER, INDIAN

BANK, MIDNAPUR BRANCH & ORS. [HRISHIKESH ROY, J.]
--- Page 8 ---
A

B

C

D

E

F

G

H

340 SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2019] 15 S.C.R.

complaint is closed under clause 13(b) of BOS, 2006 as it is

outside the pecuniary limit of the BOS.”

10. That apart, on the basis of the School’s FIR, the Kotwali PS

case No. 995/14 corresponding to GR No. 3246/14 was registered

within the jurisdiction of the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Paschim

Medinipur. The case was investigated by the police and chargesheet

(Annexure P-20) was filed. The police referred to the allegations in

the FIR and noted that the Senior Branch Manager of the concerned

Branch of Indian Bank was requested to clarify how an account with

only cheque facility can be operated with net banking process; secondly,

how any institutional account can be linked with any personal account,

without the request of the account holder and thirdly whether it is

possible to make net transaction of the account, in such situation. The

police noted that the Bank authority failed to convey their response

until the filing of the charge sheet on 29.4.2018. The charge sheet also

disclosed that charges have been framed against two persons i.e. i)

Akash Saha @ Niraj Sharma @ Boby Dutta and ii) Aditya Narayan

Kundu @ Rahul Bhattacharjee who siphoned of the money through a

series of illegal transactions. The charge sheet also revealed that there

was no complicity on the part of the School Principal Sanjiva Kumar

Sinha in the fraudulent transaction from the bank through the criminal

acts of the two chargesheeted accused.

11. In the above backdrop, the key question to be considered here

is whether, without the school’s account being linked with net banking

facility, any money from the bank account could have been siphoned

out by the miscreants. The obvious answer to this question has to be

in the negative. As concurrently found by the State Commission, the

Banking Ombudsman and also by the NCDRC, the bank has rendered

themselves liable by enabling net banking facility by linking the individual

account of the school’s Principal, to the school’s account. The only

reason why the State Commission as well as the NCDRC had limited

the compensation sum to Rs. 1,00,000/- was because of the perceived

complicity of the Principal. But the charge sheet filed by the police

reveals how the fraudulent transaction was made by the two charge

sheeted accused and more importantly the police did not find complicity

of the Principal of the school, with those fraudulent transactions. The

Banking Ombudsman too declared that the Bank was at fault which
--- Page 9 ---
A

B

C

D

E

F

G

H

341

facilitated the loss to the School but declined to order refund as the

demanded sum (Rs 30,00,000/-) was beyond the pecuniary jurisdiction

of the Banking Ombudsman.

12. Considering the above, the denial of the compensation

corresponding to the extent of the School’s loss, by the State

Commission as well as by the NCDRC would not in our view, be

justified. The question then is whether the Bank should be asked to

compensate the school for the entire loss through such fraudulent

transaction. In this context, it may be noticed that when the siphoning

of a large sum of Rs. 25,00,000/- was first detected by the school staff,

the official complaint was not lodged immediately and only on the next

date, the complaint was filed with the Bank authorities. Whether the

Bank Manager was verbally informed on the very date of detection or

on the next day is an aspect which is difficult to conclude conclusively

and therefore the subsequent siphoning of Rs. 5,00,000/- by the next

day, may have been occasioned by the contributory negligence of the

school authorities. But, insofar as the loss of Rs. 25,00,000/- is

concerned, the complainant cannot be held responsible directly or even

vicariously, either as an institution or the Principal, as an individual. We

are therefore of the view that the respondent Bank should be directed

to compensate the School to the tune of Rs. 25,00,000/- transferred

until 9.9.2014, when the misappropriation was first detected but not for

the additional sum siphoned on the next date from the School’s account.

It is ordered so accordingly. The impugned orders are interfered to this

extent. The appeal is allowed in these terms.

Ankit Gyan Appeal allowed.

DAV PUBLIC SCHOOL v. THE SENIOR MANAGER, INDIAN

BANK, MIDNAPUR BRANCH & ORS. [HRISHIKESH ROY, J.]
